Docs: Update breaking IR changes documentation wrt expression evaluation order and dirty bits clean up (#11155)
ethereum/solidity: docs/ir/ir-breaking-changes.rst

            }
        }
    }

Previously ``f()`` would return ``0x6465616462656566313564656164000000000000000000000000000000000010`` (it has correct length, and correct first 8 elements, but then it contains dirty data which was set via assembly).
Now it is returning ``0x6465616462656566000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000010`` (it has correct length, and correct elements, but does not contain superfluous data).

.. index:: ! evaluation order; expression

* For the old code generator, the evaluation order of expressions is unspecified.
  For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it.
  This can lead to semantic differences.

For example:

::
    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >0.8.0;
    contract C {
        function preincr_u8(uint8 _a) public pure returns (uint8) {
            return ++_a + _a;
        }
    }

The function ``preincr_u8(1)`` returns the following values:
- Old code generator: 3 (``1 + 2``) but the return value is unspecified in general
- New code generator: 4 (``2 + 2``) but the return value is not guaranteed

.. index:: ! evaluation order; function arguments

> On the other hand, function argument expressions are evaluated similarly by old as well as new code generators.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, function argument expressions are evaluated in the same order by both code generators.
```

For example:

::
    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >0.8.0;
    contract C {

>         function add(uint8 _a, uint _b) public pure returns (uint8) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        function add(uint8 _a, uint8 _b) public pure returns (uint8) {
```

I think this is the cause of the CI failure: https://app.circleci.com/pipelines/github/ethereum/solidity/15181/workflows/6fcbaf6b-0d56-4cf9-92a9-9da8be9d7aee/jobs/690885

         }
     }

> Previously ``f()`` would return ``0x6465616462656566313564656164000000000000000000000000000000000010`` (it has correct length, and correct first 8 elements, but than it contains dirty data which was set via assembly).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously ``f()`` would return ``0x6465616462656566313564656164000000000000000000000000000000000010`` (it has correct length, and correct first 8 elements, but then it contains dirty data which was set via assembly).
```

Reviewer: I'd also say that it's not the data that is dirty but the positions in the slot :)

Author: Does `superfluous` data make sense?

Reviewer: Yeah, though "dirty bits" seem like the more typical way to refer to this. "Dirty data" just sounds as if there's something wrong with the value itself rather than its location.

Author: Perhaps adding a brief definition of "dirty data" -> superfluous bits that may be set although they shouldn't technically be earlier in the docs be a nice way to introduce the reader to what we mean by "dirty data"?

Reviewer: I'm not sure it's necessary. My issue here is not that it's hard to understand (I think anyone who understands "dirty bits"/"superfluous data" will get what it means), just that this way to refer to it sounds a little unusual to me.

But it's also just a small nitpick. If you really think "dirty data" is the best way to refer to it, I'd leave it as is.

> Now it is returning ``0x6465616462656566000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000010`` (it has correct length, and correct elements, but doesn't contain dirty data).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now it is returning ``0x6465616462656566000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000010`` (it has correct length, and correct elements, but does not contain dirty data).
```

* For the old code generator, the evaluation order of expressions is unspecified.
  For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it.
  This can lead to semantic differences.

For example:

::
    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >0.8.0;
    contract C {
        function preincr_u8(uint8 a) public pure returns (uint8) {
            return ++a + a;
        }
    }

The function ``preincr_u8(1)`` returns the following values:

> - Old code generator: 3 (``1 + 2``) but the return value is unspecified in general

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `2 + 1`?

Author: First, the right most operand is evaluated (`1`) and then left operand is pre incremented and then addition is performed, right? Otherwise, it would be `2 + 2` as for the new code gen.

Previously `f()` would return `0x6465616462656566313564656164000000000000000000000000000000000010` (it has correct length, and correct first 8 elements, but than it contains dirty data which was set via assembly).
Now it is returning `0x6465616462656566000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000010` (it has correct length, and correct elements, but doesn't contain dirty data).

>  * Intermediate values with dirty bits are handled differently in an inline assembly block.

Reviewer 2: I think this can go into "internals", and maybe to describe it a bit more concisely: The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation where it is important to have dirty bits cleaned. The new code generator performs cleanup after each operation that can result in dirty bits.

Author: Updated.

- The old code generator does not clean up dirty bits of an intermediate value when it is read within an inline assembly block.
- The new code generator cleans up dirty bits of an intermediate value even when it is read within an inline assembly block.

For example:
::
     // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
     pragma solidity >0.8.0;
     contract C {
         function f(uint8 a) public returns(int ret)
         {
             a = ~a;
             assembly {
                 ret := a
             }
         }
     }

The function `f(uint8)` returns the following for the input 1:
- Old code gen: `fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffe`
- New code gen: `00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000fe`

> * Old code generator evaluates an expression right to left, while the new code gen evaluates an expression left to right. This can lead to semantic differences.

Reviewer 2: For the old code generator, the evaluation order is unspecified. For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order, but do not guarantee it.

I'm actually not sure if this is also true for function arguments.

Author: Updated.

Now it is returning `0x6465616462656566000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000010` (it has correct length, and correct elements, but doesn't contain dirty data).

> * For the old code generator, the evaluation order is unspecified. For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it. This can lead to semantic differences.

Reviewer: This line is a bit too long. I'd suggest breaking it.

By the way, I find it pretty natural to break lines in Markdown and RST at the end of the sentence. This way you only have to rewrap the one line you modified, not the whole paragraph. It make diffs less noisy too.

```suggestion
* For the old code generator, the evaluation order is unspecified.
  For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it.
  This can lead to semantic differences.
```

> * For the old code generator, the evaluation order is unspecified. For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it. This can lead to semantic differences.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For the old code generator, the evaluation order of expressions is unspecified. For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it. This can lead to semantic differences.
```

> * For the old code generator, the evaluation order is unspecified. For the new code generator, we try to evaluate in source order (left to right), but do not guarantee it. This can lead to semantic differences.

Reviewer: How about adding an index entry here?
```rst
.. index:: ! evaluation order; expression 
```

For example:

::
     // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
     pragma solidity >0.8.0;
     contract C {
         function preincr_u8(uint8 a) public pure returns (uint8) {
             return ++a + a;
         }

>      }

Reviewer: Why 5-space indents?

```suggestion
::
    // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
    pragma solidity >0.8.0;
    contract C {
        function preincr_u8(uint8 a) public pure returns (uint8) {
            return ++a + a;
        }
    }
```

Reviewer: Other snippets still have this weird identation ;)

> The function `preincr_u8(uint8)` returns the following for the input 1:
> - Old code gen: 3 (`1 + 2`) but the return value is unspecified in general
> - New code gen: 4 (`2 + 2`) but the return value is not guaranteed

Reviewer: In RST the double backtick (``` `` ```) is the equivalent of Markdown's single backtick (`` ` ``). Single backticks in RST are something different.

```suggestion
The function ``preincr_u8(uint8)`` returns the following for the input 1:
- Old code gen: 3 (``1 + 2``) but the return value is unspecified in general
- New code gen: 4 (``2 + 2``) but the return value is not guaranteed
```

> - Old code gen: 3 (`1 + 2`) but the return value is unspecified in general
> - New code gen: 4 (`2 + 2`) but the return value is not guaranteed

Reviewer: This doc uses either `code generator` or `codegen`. I'd use that instead of `code gen` for consistency:
```suggestion
- Old code generator: 3 (`1 + 2`) but the return value is unspecified in general
- New code generator: 4 (`2 + 2`) but the return value is not guaranteed
```

> This behavior also true for function argument expressions.

Reviewer: ```rst
.. index:: ! evaluation order; function arguments
```

Reviewer 2: `function arguments`?

Reviewer: The part after the `;` is a subitem so it will look like this in the index:
```
    evaluation order
        function arguments
```

> This behavior also true for function argument expressions.
> 
> For example:

Reviewer: The example refers to this sentence, right?
```suggestion
This behavior also true for function argument expressions.
For example:
```

::
     // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
     pragma solidity >0.8.0;
     contract C {
         function identity(uint8 a) public pure returns (uint8) {
             return a;
         }
         function g(uint8 b) public pure returns (uint8) {

>              return identity(++b + b);

Reviewer: Isn't it supposed to show the order in which separate parameters are evaluated? I think it does not show that with just one argument. I think an example like this would be more suitable here:

```suggestion
             return identity(++a + ++b, ++a + ++b);
```

Author: > I think it does not show that with just one argument

Why not? `++b + b` will be different depending on left-to-right evaluation and vice versa. If `b` is initially `1`, the left-to-right gives us `2 + 2`, `1 + 2` otherwise (right-to-left).

Reviewer: Yes it will be different but this example seems redundant to me. The one above already shows the evaluation order in expressions and I don't see why it would be different when the expression is placed in a function call.

So the only way including this example makes sense to me is if you wanted to show evaluation order between expressions included in different arguments.

Author: > Yes it will be different but this example seems redundant to me. The one above already shows the evaluation order in expressions and I don't see why it would be different when the expression is placed in a function call.

Ah, now I see what you mean. Will update.

Author: Updated. Good catch! Looks like function argument evaluation order actually does not differ across old and new code gens.

>          function identity(uint8 a) public pure returns (uint8) {
>              return a;
>          }
>          function g(uint8 b) public pure returns (uint8) {
>              return identity(++b + b);
>          }

Reviewer: I think that the code snippets should consistently use the parameter naming convention we recommend to users:

```suggestion
         function identity(uint8 _a) public pure returns (uint8) {
             return _a;
         }
         function g(uint8 _b) public pure returns (uint8) {
             return identity(++_b + _b);
         }
```

Author: Changed it elsewhere as well.

The ID ``0`` is reserved for uninitialized function pointers which then cause a panic in the disptach function when called.

In the old code generator, internal function pointers are initialized with a special function that always causes a panic.
This causes a storage write at construction time for internal function pointers in storage.

> Clean up:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cleanup:
```

> Clean up:

Reviewer: Why not use headings for this and for `Internal function pointers:` above?
```suggestion
Clean up
--------
```

> Clean up:

Reviewer: ```rst
.. index:: cleanup, dirty bits
```

> The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation where it is important to have dirty bits cleaned.

Reviewer: How about this?
```suggestion
The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation that could be affected by the the values of the dirty bits.
```

The new code generator performs cleanup after any operation that can result in dirty bits.

For example:
::
     // SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0
     pragma solidity >0.8.0;
     contract C {
         function f(uint8 a) public returns(uint r1, uint r2)
         {
             a = ~a;
             assembly {
                 r1 := a
             }
             r2 = a;
         }
     }

> The function `f(uint8)` returns the following for the input 1:

Reviewer: This sounded a bit confusing to me at first until I realized that by "input 1" you mean passing `1` to the function rather than referring to the argument at position 1. Maybe this wording would be better?
```suggestion
The call ``f(1)`` returns the following values:
```

- Old code gen: (`fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffe`, `00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000fe`)
- New code gen: (`00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000fe`, `00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000fe`)

> Note that, unlike the new code generator, the old code generator does not perform a clean up after the bit not assignment (`a = ~a`).
> This results in different values being assigned (within the inline assembly block) to return value `r1` between the old and new code generators.
> However, both code generators perform a clean up before the new value of `a` is assigned to `r2`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that, unlike the new code generator, the old code generator does not perform a cleanup after the bit-not assignment (``a = ~a``).
This results in different values being assigned (within the inline assembly block) to return value `r1` between the old and new code generators.
However, both code generators perform a cleanup before the new value of ``a`` is assigned to ``r2``.
```

The ID ``0`` is reserved for uninitialized function pointers which then cause a panic in the disptach function when called.

In the old code generator, internal function pointers are initialized with a special function that always causes a panic.
This causes a storage write at construction time for internal function pointers in storage.

> Clean up

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cleanup
```
?

--------

.. index:: cleanup, dirty bits

> The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation that could be affected by the the values of the dirty bits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation whose result that could be affected by the the values of the dirty bits.
```
Maybe also more explicitly: The old generator delays cleanup if the cleaned result of an operation is the same regardless of whether the inputs are cleaned or not.

> The new code generator performs cleanup after any operation that can result in dirty bits.

Reviewer 2: In addition to doing cleanup on inputs, right?

The ID ``0`` is reserved for uninitialized function pointers which then cause a panic in the disptach function when called.

In the old code generator, internal function pointers are initialized with a special function that always causes a panic.
This causes a storage write at construction time for internal function pointers in storage.

> Cleanup
> --------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cleanup
-------
```

Reviewer: And I'd change `Internal function pointers:` above to be a heading too.

.. index:: cleanup, dirty bits

> The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation whose result could be affected by the the values of the dirty bits.

Reviewer: Looks like my suggestion had a superfluous `the`. Sorry for that :)
```suggestion
The old code generator only performs cleanup before an operation whose result could be affected by the values of the dirty bits.
```
